# Summary of law on *Actus Reus*

## General points on *actus reus*:

The *actus reus* can be defined as "a physically voluntary act or
omission."

For an offence to be committed, the *actus reus* and *mens rea* must be concurrent---on the principle that if not, courts would punish either conduct without fault or guilty intent not expressed in guilty action.

The *actus reus* of an offence must be carried out voluntarily and can include the failure to act.

The principle of legality requires that the *actus reus* for a criminal
offence is set out in an offence (enacted and published) at the time it
was committed, and that the definition of the offence not be overbroad
or vague. (The principle is partially entrenched in 11(g) of the
*Charter*.)

## The Principle of Concurrency:

As a general principle, the *actus reus* and *mens rea* must concur.
(*Fagan*, *Cooper*)

They need not be "completely concurrent" throughout the commission of an
offence but must coincide "at some point." (*Cooper*)

Courts may take an expansive view of when the *actus reus* is completed:
a "series of acts \[or omissions\] may form part of the same
transaction." (*Cooper*)

An act (or an omission) carried out unintentionally at first can be
"adopted" by a later decision not to act to rectify it. If an act is
continuous, a person's adoption of an earlier omission or unintentional
act will constitute a concurrence of the *actus reus* and *mens rea*.
(*Miller*)

### Voluntariness:

The *actus reus* must be committed voluntarily. (*Kilbride*, *King*)

Voluntariness entails "conscious control of action" or action that is
the "product of conscious choice." This is premised on the belief that
it would be unfair and unjust to punish persons for conduct they did not
choose or could not physically control. (*Kilbride*, *King*)

At common law, "a person is presumed to have intended the natural and
probable consequences of their actions." Thus, where an accused carries
out a basic act, forming one or more elements of the *actus reus*---for
example, pushing or punching another person---he or she is presumed to
have acted voluntarily. (*Bernard*, *Daviault*)

An accused may raise a doubt about whether she acted voluntarily by
adducing evidence that, at the time of the offence, she was affected by
mental or physical disorders or conditions, including sleepwalking,
concussion, delirium, epileptic seizure, or involuntary intoxication.

The concept of voluntariness in Canadian criminal law refers to choice
and control over *physical* actions. In *Ruzic*, the SCC recognized that
acts carried out under necessity or duress are "morally involuntary."
The Court in *Ruzic* and *Hibbert* also held that, in contrast to
physical involuntariness, moral involuntariness does not negate the
*actus reus* or the *mens rea*. It may, however, excuse the acts (if the
elements of the defence of necessity or duress are made out), thus
resulting in an acquittal.

## Omissions:

A failure to act can form the basis of criminal liability only where the
failure constitutes the breach of a **legal** duty to act.

There is no general legal duty in Canadian criminal law to be a good
Samaritan: *i.e*., to assist someone in distress, or prevent a crime
from occurring or continuing---even when one can do so easily and
without risk or disadvantage.

A number of *Code* provisions criminalize omissions on the basis of
duties set out in the offence provision itself---for example, section
129(b): failing to assist a police officer when requested, or section
252(1): failing to stop, give ID, and render assistance after being
involved in an accident.

Other offence provisions include as part of the *actus reus* the breach
of a legal duty set out elsewhere in the law: *e.g.*,

> -s. 180(2) -- common nuisance: "Everyone commits a common nuisance who
> does an unlawful act *or fails to discharge a legal duty* and thereby
> (a) endangers lives, safety, health, property or comfort of the public
> ..."
>
> -s. 220 -- criminal negligence causing death. This offence draws on
> the definition of criminal negligence in 219:
>
> \(1\) Everyone is criminally negligent who

(a) in doing anything, or

> \(b\) *in omitting to do anything that it is his duty to do*,
>
> shows wanton or reckless disregard for the lives or safety of other
> persons.
>
> \(2\) For the purposes of this section, "duty" means a duty imposed by
> law.

The *Code* itself contains provisions that set out legal duties that can
be applied under sections 180 or 219, including:

> -s. 216 -- setting out a duty of persons to use reasonable care in
> undertaking acts that may endanger life.
>
> -s. 217 -- stating: "Everyone who undertakes to do an act is under a
> legal duty to do it if an omission to do the act is or may be
> dangerous to life."

The Ontario Court of Appeal in *Thornton* held that the legal duty
referred to in section 180(2) can be found in either federal or
provincial statutes or at common law. It also held that a valid duty in
this context is the one set out in *Donoghue v. Stevenson* to "take
reasonable care not to injure one's neighbour."

The Ontario Court of Appeal in *Brown* held that for the purposes of
section 217, an "undertaking" requires a commitment to do something that
is "clearly made and with binding intent." The "mere expression of words
indicating a willingness to act" will not suffice.

## Consequences and Causation:

*General points:*

Where the *actus reus* of an offence includes the element of causation
("dangerous driving causing death"), the Crown must prove causation
BARD.

If the accused's actions are the direct or main cause (*i.e.*, the
factual cause), then causation is made out. No need to go further.

But if the accused's actions are only a contributing cause, the court
must consider whether those actions are the 'legal cause.' The test for
legal causation is whether the actions of the accused were a
"contributing cause beyond the *de minimus*". (*Smithers*)

Legal causation refers to a person's moral responsibility for a
prohibited consequence where his or her acts were a significant cause
but not necessarily the only or main cause. (*Smithers*, *Nette*)

### Test for legal causation:

The test for legal causation in criminal law was reformulated in
*Nette*: the act at issue must be "a significant contributing cause."
The majority of the SCC in *Nette* held that this was a preferable way
of formulating the **same** (or equally acceptable) test set out earlier
in *Smithers* ("a contributing cause beyond the *de minimus*").

Legal and factual causes may be distinct, with the accused's acts
forming only one of two or more operative causes. (*Smithers*,
*Harbottle*)

The accused's conduct therefore need not be the "sole cause," the "main
cause," or even a "substantial cause" in order to be the legal cause.
(*Smithers*)

{{< hint info >}}
**Intervening acts**

An intervening act may interrupt the causal chain between the accused
and the harm inflicted, raising a reasonable doubt about whether the
accused's original act was a 'significant contributing cause.'
(*Harbottle, Maybin*)

The SCC in *Maybin* held that courts may consider one or both of two
possible 'lines of inquiry' to assess whether an intervening act or
event severs the causal link between the accused's actions and the
consequence at issue (or raises a doubt about this):

1.  was the event reasonably foreseeable from the act of the accused --
    not the specific act, but the general nature of it; and/or

2.  was the event a response to the accused's act or was it an
    independent, intentional act that overwhelmed the act of the
    accused?

(The Court also held that the main test remains the one in *Smithers/Nette*.)
{{< /hint >}}

The *Smithers/Nette* test applies to all offences, including
manslaughter and murder, with the exception of 'constructive'
first-degree murder under sections 231(5) and (6) noted below (or unless
the offence provision provides otherwise).

The requirement to establish causation is a principle of fundamental
justice under section 7 of the *Charter*, as part of the broader
principle that the morally innocent should not be punished.

The Ontario Court of Appeal has held that the *Smithers' de minimus*
test does **not** offend fundamental justice by setting too low a
threshold for proof of causation, given the fact that for more serious
crimes such as manslaughter, the Crown must also establish objective
foreseeability of a risk of bodily harm that is neither trivial nor
transitory. (*Cribben*)

### Causation and murder:

For the forms of first-degree murder set out in sections 231(5) and (6)
(or where similar terms are used), the test for causation is whether the
accused's conduct was "a substantial and integral cause of death".
(*Harbottle*, *Nette*)

For **all** other forms of murder (*i.e.*, first and second degree), the
test for causation is the one set out in *Smithers*/*Nette*.
