# Summary of law on *Mens Rea*

## General points on *mens rea*:

There is no single kind or level of fault that applies to all criminal
or regulatory offences.

The Supreme Court has held that it is a principle of fundamental justice
under section 7 of the *Charter* that a person should not be convicted
of a *criminal* offence without the Crown having to prove a fault
element, and one that is proportionate to the gravity of the offence.
(*Hess*, *Creighton*)

Section 7 does not therefore require that a conviction for a *criminal*
offence rest on proof of **subjective** *mens rea*. It requires proof of
**a** fault element, and the fault element need only attach to **a**
blameworthy element of the *actus reus*. For most crimes, objective
*mens rea* is constitutionally sufficient, so long as it is commensurate
to the gravity of the offence. (*DeSousa, Creighton*)

'Special stigma crimes' are a partial exception. The Court has
identified a category of offences to be 'special stigma' offences, based
on their stigma and penalty. In *Vaillancourt*, the Court held that it
is a principle of fundamental justice that a person cannot be convicted
of such an offence without proof of "a *mens rea* reflecting the
particular nature of the crime." For theft: proof of dishonesty; for
murder: proof of subjective foresight of death.

In the case of a negligence-based **criminal** offence, section 7
requires proof of the accused's failure to be aware of a risk arising
from conduct amounting to a marked departure from the standard of the
reasonable person. (*Creighton*)

Section 7 requires that any offence that may result in a deprivation of
liberty (jail, probation) cannot be an absolute liability offence. A
regulatory offence with penal consequences must either require proof of
fault or allow for proof of a lack of fault (as in strict liability).
(*BC Motor Vehicle Reference*)

## Common law presumptions about the fault element:

**Where an offence provision is silent on *mens rea***, the common law
presumes that a certain level of fault is required, depending on whether
the offence is criminal or regulatory in nature.

-an offence can be inferred to be "criminal" where it:

> -carries a serious penalty or stigma; and/or
>
> -absolutely prohibits and punishes inherently wrongful conduct.

-an offence can be inferred to be "regulatory" where it:

> -appears in either a provincial or federal statute;
>
> -its predominant purpose is the regulation of a risk or the prevention
> of harm to public welfare through the requirement to abide by a
> minimum standard of care or conduct; and
>
> -carries a relatively low penalty and stigma (i.e., a jail sentence of
> roughly 3 years or less)
>
> (*Beaver, Pierce*, *Sault Ste. Marie*, *Wholesale Travel*)

Offences in the *Criminal Code* are presumed to be criminal. (*Prue,
Buzzanga*) The same presumption arguably extends to offences in other
criminal law statutes such as the *CDSA* and the *YCJA*.

If an offence is a **criminal** offence and is **silent** as to *mens
rea*, there is a presumption at common law that the offence requires the
Crown to prove a subjective form of *mens rea* (intent, knowledge,
willful blindness or recklessness) for the prohibited act (*i.e.*, not for each element of *actus reus*). (*Sault Ste. Marie*, *Buzzanga*, *R v ADH* \[SCC 2013\])

If a criminal offence in the Code is ambiguous as to the mens rea, then the presumption of subjective fault has not been displaced. (*Zora*)

In the case of offences (aside from murder) that include aggravated
assault, unlawful act causing bodily harm and unlawful act manslaughter,
the Supreme Court has held that a distinct fault element may attach to
the assault or unlawful act (subjective or objective *mens rea*, as the
case may be), but the fault element in relation to the prohibited
consequence (bodily harm, death, etc.) may be as low as 'objective
foreseeability of non-trivial harm.' (*DeSousa*, *Creighton*)

If the offence is a **criminal** offence, the burden rests on the Crown
to prove the requisite *mens rea*.

Where an offence is a **regulatory** offence and is silent as to the
requisite fault element, there is a presumption that it is a strict
liability offence. In this case, the Crown is required to prove only the
*actus reus* BARD and negligence is inferred from this in the absence of
proof on the part of the accused (on a balance of probabilities) that he
or she took reasonable care to avoid the prohibited consequence. (*Sault
Ste. Marie*)

Not all regulatory offences are either strict or absolute liability.
There is a *presumption* that regulatory offences are strict liability
where the offence provision is silent as to *mens rea*. There is a
further presumption that an offence is one of absolutely liability only
where Parliament or the legislature makes this intention clear through
either explicit language or other indications, such as subject matter or
context (regulatory, minor penalty, no stigma). However, Parliament and
provincial legislatures can also create a regulatory offence that
requires the Crown to prove a *mens rea* element, either subjective or
objective (*e.g.*, knowledge, intent, reasonable foreseeability, etc.)
by including language to this effect. (*Sault Ste. Marie*, *Stasser*)

## Hierarchy of forms of *mens rea* or fault:
{{< hint info >}}
1\. full or subjective MR

2\. objective foresight or knowledge (the accused ought to have known a
consequence would follow)

3\. criminal negligence (defined in s 219 of the Code)

4\. penal negligence (criminal offence involving a departure from a
standard: *e.g.*, careless use of a firearm)

5\. strict liability (Crown proves AR, accused may establish defence of
due diligence or incapacity)

6\. absolute liability (Crown proves AR, no fault necessary)
{{< /hint >}}

## Subjective *mens rea*:

If a criminal offence contains a specific term or phrase such as "with
intent," "wilfully," "knowingly," etc., this will generally exclude
lower forms of *mens rea.* For example, a provision requiring that a
prohibited consequence be committed intentionally, willfully, or on
purpose will exclude knowledge, wilful blindness, or recklessness as
alternate forms of *mens rea*. (*Buzzanga*; *Chartrand*, SCC 1994)

Where a provision requires proof that the accused did something intentionally or wilfully, the Crown may prove this by establishing either:

> i\. **direct intent**: *i.e.*, that the accused consciously or
> deliberately intended to bring about the prohibited consequence.
>
> (For example, in the offence of 'wilfully promoting hatred': a person
> intends to communicate and also directly/explicitly intends for his
> communication to promote hatred)
>
> ii\. **indirect intent**: *i.e.*, that the accused intended to do one
> thing but subjectively foresaw that a prohibited consequence was
> certain or substantially certain to follow from it.[^1]
>
> (For example, communicating something that is substantially certain to
> promote hatred -- here a person may intend only to communicate
> something satirical, but where he also foresees that it is
> substantially certain to promote hatred as well, he is deemed to have
> intended to promote hatred too, even though his immediate intention
> might only have been to communicate a satirical message.)

In both cases the accused will be found to have intended the prohibited
consequence. (*Buzzanga*)

Where an offence requires that something be done 'for the purpose' of
achieving a prohibited result, the Crown need only prove that a person
acted intentionally or deliberately in effecting that result. The Crown
need not prove that the person also *desired* it. Conversely, where a
person carries out a certain act deliberately but does not desire that
it be done (killing, assault, etc.), she does not thereby negate the
intentional character of her act (but she may rely on the defence of
duress). (*Hibbert*)

Recklessness is a subjective form of *mens rea* in which a person is
aware of a risk (of a prohibited result) but decides to take it.
(*Sansregret*)

Wilful blindness is a form of *mens rea* in which a person becomes aware
of the need for some inquiry but declines to make it (or is
"deliberately ignorant"). (*Sansregret, Duong, Briscoe*)

WB requires a strong suspicion of a prohibited consequence, combined
with a deliberate choice not to inquire so as to avoid being fixed with
knowledge. The fault lies not in failing to inquire but choosing not to
when a strong suspicion is aroused. (*Briscoe*)

Wherever knowledge is an element of the fault component for an offence,
wilful blindness may substitute. (*Briscoe*)

If wilful blindness substitutes for the knowledge element in a charge of
murder it requires -- for either the principal or the party -- not just
a 'strong suspicion of a prohibited consequence' but awareness that
death is likely. (Roach, Sankoff and Manning)

Whether a person was reckless or wilfully blind does **not** involve a
consideration of the perspective of the reasonable person. Where an
offence requires proof of recklessness or wilful blindness, the question
for the trier of fact is **not** whether the accused *ought* to have
been aware of a risk, or *ought* to have made an inquiry, but rather,
whether she was *personally* aware of a risk or deliberately ignorant of
the need for an inquiry. (*Sansregret*, *Briscoe*)

## Objective forms of *mens rea*:

Objective forms of *mens rea* are offences in which one or another part
of the fault element of the offence is assessed in terms of the
reasonable person.

The form or level of objective fault may vary depending on the offence.
Some offences require only 'objective knowledge,' or the reasonable
person's awareness of the risk of a prohibited consequence. Other
offences employ the concept of negligence and are assessed in terms of
the accused's departure from the standard of care of the reasonable
person.

*Criminal* offences that involve the concept of negligence take two
forms. "Criminal negligence" is defined in section 219 and is included in the offences set out
in sections 220 and 221. These hold a person criminally
responsible for either their awareness of or failure to be aware of the
risk arising from conduct amounting to a *marked and substantial*
departure from the standard of care the reasonable person and their
failure to avoid it where the reasonable person in their circumstances
would have been able to.

By contrast, all other *criminal* offences that involve negligence
(*i.e.*, the departure from a standard of care) are referred to as
"penal negligence" offences. A person is held responsible under these
offences for the same awareness or failure to be aware of a risk arising
from their conduct as in "criminal negligence" offences, but here the
standard is simply conduct amounting to a *marked departure* from that
of the reasonable person.

For all *criminal* offences involving objective forms of fault, the onus
remains on the Crown to prove *mens rea*.

By contrast, the Supreme Court in *Wholesale Travel* held that the
minimum level of fault required in order for a *regulatory* offence
carrying a *prison* sentence to be consistent with section 7 of the
*Charter* is negligence *simplicitor*. (Thus, a provincial offence
leading to jail *can* rest on strict liability.)

In a strict liability offence, negligence may be inferred from the
*actus reus* in the absence of proof that the accused acted with
reasonable care (due diligence). The Crown need not prove a fault
element -- it suffices for the negligence to be inferred from the *actus
reus* with the persuasive burden shifting to the accused to prove a
*lack* of negligence. (*Wholesale Travel*)

In criminal offences involving an objective form of fault, courts apply
a "modified objective test," which asks whether the risk raised by the
conduct at issue would have been foreseeable to the reasonable person in
the same circumstances of the accused -- but without the reasonable
person sharing the personal characteristics of the accused such as age,
education, and experience. (*Creighton*)

### i. Objective foresight or knowledge:

Forms of objective fault are found in a variety of offences. For
example, some might require that a person "knew or ought to have known"
something. Some offences of objective fault entail a dual structure
where part of the *actus reus* might require subjective (or objective)
fault but the prohibited consequence requires only objective foresight
of non-trivial harm. Examples of this include manslaughter, unlawful act
causing bodily harm, and assault causing bodily harm.

In the case of manslaughter (by unlawful act) or unlawful act causing
bodily harm (s. 269), the Crown must prove the *mens rea* for the
unlawful act (intent for assault), along with objective foreseeability
of the risk of bodily harm beyond the trivial or the transitory.
(*Creighton, DeSousa*)

### ii. Penal and criminal negligence:

#### Penal negligence

In *Creighton,* the Court set out a general framework for assessing the
*actus reus* and *mens rea* for **penal** **negligence** offences:

> Actus reus: an act or omission carried out in a manner constituting a *marked departure* from the conduct of the reasonably prudent person in the circumstances.
>
> Mens rea:
>
>(a) awareness of the risk arising from conduct amounting to
> a marked departure from that of the reasonable person in the
> circumstances; or
>
> \(b\) the failure to be aware of this risk where it was objectively
> foreseeable (which may be inferred from the *actus reus* absent
> evidence of incapacity or a reasonable mistake of fact).

To be clear, where the *actus reus* has been proved (*i.e.*, conduct
amounting to a marked departure), the accused bears an evidentiary but
not a persuasive burden with respect to the defences of incapacity and
mistake of fact. The accused can thus raise a doubt about whether the
reasonable person in her circumstances would have been aware of the risk
by virtue of adducing *some* evidence of:

> i\. **incapacity** (*i.e.*, the accused suffered some physical or
> mental incapacity that would have prevented the reasonable person,
> suffering the same condition, from appreciating the risk posed by the
> conduct at issue, or abiding by a reasonable standard of care); or
>
> ii\. an **honest and reasonable belief in a mistaken fact.**
> (*Creighton*, *Beatty*)

For either defence, once the evidentiary burden is met (some evidence),
the persuasive burden remains on the Crown to prove BARD that incapacity
or mistake of fact **do not** apply (*i.e.*, there is no reasonable
possibility that they do apply). (See note on mistake of fact below.)


The Supreme Court's decision in *Beatty* entails a slight exception to
this framework for negligence-based criminal offences in that it holds
that the *actus reus* for dangerous driving in s. 249 is driving that is
"objectively dangerous, having regard to all the circumstances." The SCC
in *Roy* held that to establish the *mens rea* under 249, the Crown must
prove that the reasonable person in the circumstances would have
foreseen the risk arising from the driving and taken steps to avoid it,
**or** that the accused's failure to foresee the risk and take steps to
avoid it constituted a marked departure from the standard of care of the
reasonable driver (absent evidence of incapacity or a reasonable mistake
of fact).

In a series of cases dealing with penal negligence, the Supreme Court
has held that given the *criminal* nature of these offences, section 7
of the *Charter* requires at least proof on the part of the Crown of
negligence to the standard of a marked departure. Put otherwise, the
minimal constitutional standard of negligence for a *criminal* offence
is proof of conduct amounting to a marked departure from the standard of
care of the reasonable person---and either the accused's awareness of
this or their failure to be aware in circumstances in which the
reasonable person would have been aware. (*Creighton*, *Hundal*,
*Beatty*)

#### Criminal negligence

The Supreme Court in *Javanmardi* (2019) set out the elements of **criminal negligence** s. 219 in relation to the offence of criminal negligence causing death (s 221):

> Actus reus:  the accused undertook an act — or omitted to do anything that it was his or her legal duty to do — and the act or omission caused someone’s death.
>
> Mens rea: (a) awareness of the risk to lives or safety of others
> arising from conduct amounting to a marked and substantial departure
> from that of the reasonable person in the circumstances; or
>
> \(b\) the failure to be aware of this risk where it was objectively
> foreseeable (where “a reasonable person would have foreseen the risk and taken steps to avoid it if possible”)

On the meaning of the words "marked and substantial", the Court in *Javanmardi* cited lower court dicta holding that "they do not, and cannot, indicate any objective and fixed order of magnitude that would have prescriptive value from one case to another. As with the assessment of conduct in cases of criminal negligence, the assessment of fault by the trier of fact is entirely contextual."

The defences to criminal negligence would operate in the same fashion as
those for penal negligence offences, as noted above.

## Strict Liability:

Where a regulatory offence is silent as to *mens rea*, there is a
presumption that it is a strict liability offence. (*Sault Ste-Marie*)

In a strict liability offence, the Crown must prove only the *actus
reus* beyond a reasonable doubt. The accused may raise a doubt about the
*actus reus* by adducing evidence that the act was involuntary (or by
raising a doubt about whether it was voluntary). (*S.S. Marie*)

In a **strict liability offence**, *once* the Crown has proved the
*actus reus*, the accused is entitled to an acquittal if he can
establish, on a balance of probabilities, that he:

i.  took all reasonable care to avoid the event (due diligence); or

ii. reasonably believed in a mistaken set of facts. (*S.S. Marie*,
    *Wholesale Travel*)

In assessing reasonable care or reasonable mistake of fact here, "the
Court considers circumstances that the reasonable person would have
seen, not the circumstances that the accused actually perceived." (K.
Roach, *Criminal Law*, 5^th^ edition.)

Placing the accused in this reverse onus violates 11(d) of the *Charter*
but is justified under s. 1 on the basis of the importance of strict
liability offences as a means of advancing public policy objectives and
the difficulty of requiring the Crown to prove negligence in cases of
this nature. (*Wholesale Travel*)

## Absolute Liability:

In an absolute liability offence, the Crown need only prove the *actus
reus* (beyond a reasonable doubt). The accused may raise a doubt whether
the *actus reus* has been proved and/or was carried out voluntarily.

An offence is presumed not to involve absolute liability unless
Parliament or the legislature makes this intention clear through
explicit language, or if the subject matter or context implies this.
(*Levis*, *Sault Ste. Marie*)

An absolute liability offence that gives rise to the possibility of
imprisonment or other deprivations of liberty (probation) violates
section 7 of the *Charter* and is not justified under section 1. (*B.C.
Motor Vehicle Reference*)

An absolute liability offence may be defended by seeking to raise a
doubt about whether the *actus reus* was committed voluntarily due to
automatism, mental disorder, extreme intoxication, or necessity. The
defence of mistake of fact (even if reasonable) is not available.
(*Hickey*, OCA 1976; K. Roach, *Criminal Law*, 5^th^ edition.)

## Constitutional Considerations:

The Supreme Court has held that certain offences carry a "special
stigma" -- possibly involving the penalty attached to them, but not
necessarily -- and that the principles of fundamental justice require
proof of a level of fault commensurate with this stigma. A conviction
for theft would require "proof of some dishonesty," for murder, proof of
"subjective foresight" of death. (*Vaillancourt*, *Martineau*)

A conviction for *murder* cannot be based on proof of an objective form
of fault, *i.e.*, what the accused "ought to have known" or "ought to
have foreseen." (*Martineau*)

In the case of 'war crimes' or 'crimes against humanity,' fundamental
justice requires more than the *mens rea* for the various crimes
committed as part of these offences (murder, kidnapping, etc.). It also
requires additional subjective *mens rea* of the fact that the actions
in question are carried out in circumstances which bring the offence
within the definition of war crimes or crimes against humanity.
(*Finta*)

## Note on the defence of 'mistake of fact'

Mistake of fact is a defence in the sense that it may form the basis of
a reasonable doubt about *mens rea* rather than serving as a
justification or excuse where elements of the offence have been
established.

In the case of full or subjective *mens rea* offences, an honest but
mistaken belief in a fact may raise a doubt about *mens rea* even if
**the belief is not reasonable**.

In the case of subjective *mens rea* offences, "the existence or
non-existence of reasonable grounds" for a mistaken belief "is merely
relevant evidence to be weighed" by the trier of fact in assessing
whether the belief was honestly held. (*Rees*)

In the context of sexual assault (a subjective *mens rea* offence), the
operation of this rule has been qualified by section 273.2(b) which
states that an accused may not rely on a mistaken belief in consent
unless he or she can establish that they took "reasonable steps, in the
circumstances known to the accused at the time, to ascertain that the
complainant was consenting".

In the case of negligence-based and objective *mens rea* offences
(objective foresight), mistake of fact is available as a defence but
subject to the requirement that the mistaken fact be both honestly held
*and* *reasonable* (*i.e.*, in the eyes of the reasonable person).

### Evidentiary and Persuasive Burdens in Mistake of Fact:

#### For full subjective and objective fault criminal offences:

The accused bears an evidentiary but not a persuasive burden to rely on
this defence. The test for an evidentiary burden in the case of defences
generally is that the accused must simply raise *some* evidence for each
element of the defence on which a properly instructed jury acting
reasonably could acquit if it believed the evidence to be true (or in
this case, if it believed the mistake was honestly held \[and also, for
objective fault offences, reasonable\]).

Once the **evidentiary** burden is met (*i.e.*, 'some evidence for each
element'), the Crown must prove BARD that the mistake was either **not**
honestly held or, in the context of an objective fault offence, not
honestly held or not reasonable or both. (*i.e.,* that there is no
reasonable possibility that...)

#### For strict liability:

The Crown bears a burden to prove only the *actus reus* BARD, and then
both the evidentiary *and* **persuasive** burdens shift to the accused
to prove, **on a balance of probabilities**, that she took reasonable
steps to avoid the conduct at issue or acted on the basis of a belief,
honestly and reasonably held, amounting to a mistake of fact.

[^1]: Note that in some cases the *Code* or statute may provide
    otherwise: *e.g.*, section 429(1) of the *Code* states that in Part
    XI of the *Code*, a person may do something 'wilfully' where she
    acts with knowledge that a prohibited consequence is only
    *probable*.
