# Summary of Homicide

## General points:

Section 222 of the *Criminal Code* defines homicide as directly or
indirectly causing the death of a human being. The *Code* sets out four
forms of homicide: non-culpable, murder, manslaughter or infanticide.

Section 234 states "culpable homicide that is not murder or infanticide
is manslaughter."

Infanticide functions as both an offence (mother killing baby when still
suffering post-partum effects) and a partial defence to murder (lowering
murder to manslaughter).

Manslaughter may be punished up to life and has no mandatory minimum
sentence, except with use of a firearm, which carries a 4-year minimum.

Murder carries a mandatory life sentence, with a minimum 10-year parole
ineligibility period for second degree, and 25 years of ineligibility
for first degree. (Different rules apply to a 'young person' who commits
murder, even when sentenced as an adult.)

## Manslaughter

The most common forms of manslaughter are set out in section 222(5):

> -section 222(5)(a) causing death by an unlawful act;[^1] or
>
> -section 222(5)(b) by criminal negligence.

### Unlawful act manslaughter:

>The *actus reus* of unlawful act manslaughter is an unlawful act that
causes death. The unlawful act may consist of any federal or provincial
offence other than an absolute liability offence.[^2] (*DeSousa*, *Javanmardi*)
>
>The *mens rea* for unlawful act manslaughter is (a) the fault element
for the unlawful act and (b) objective foreseeability of a risk of
bodily harm beyond the trivial or transitory. (*Creighton*)

The reasonable person in this test (as in all objective fault offences)
is one who is in the same circumstances as the accused and shares only
the characteristics of the accused that would render her unable to
appreciate the risk (*i.e.*, the same **incapacities** as the accused).
(*Creighton*)

### Manslaughter caused by criminal negligence (220)

>Actus reus: an act by the accused — or an omission to do anything they were under a legal duty to do — which shows ‘wanton and reckless disregard’ for life or safety and causes a person’s death. (*Javanmardi*, *R. v. J(F)* )
>
>Mens rea: (a) awareness of the risk presented by conduct amounting to a marked and substantial departure from that of the reasonable person in the circumstances; or (b) the failure to be aware of the risk posed by this conduct where “a reasonable person would have foreseen the risk and taken steps to avoid it if possible”. (*Javanmardi*, *R. v. J(F)*)

An accused here can rely on the defences of incapacity or a reasonable mistake of fact. *R. v. J(F)*, *Creighton* (See the summary on *mens rea*)

## Murder

Section 229 sets out four ways to commit **murder**:
{{< hint info >}}
i.  229(a)(i) causing death where the accused **means** to cause death;

ii. 229(a)(ii) causing death where the accused **means** to cause
    **bodily harm** that he **knows is likely to cause death**;

iii. 229(b) where the accused means to cause death or bodily harm (that
     he knows is likely to cause death) in relation to one person but by
     accident or mistake kills another; or

iv. 229(c) where a person pursuing an unlawful object does anything that
    he knows is likely to cause death and causes death despite the fact
    that he desired to effect the unlawful object without causing death
    or bodily harm.
{{< /hint >}}

Knowledge that harm is "likely to cause death" in section 229(a)(ii)
means knowledge that death is "probable" and not simply a possibility, a
risk, or a chance. (*Cooper*, *Nygaard*)

### Causation for murder:

In addition to special rules for causation in sections 224 to 226 of the
*Code*, which apply to all forms of culpable homicide, the general
common law test for causation applies to murder: "a significant
contributing cause." (*Nette*)

This test also applies to section 231(2), which states generally that
"Murder is first degree murder when it is planned and deliberate", and
to provisions which raise to first degree the murdering of a police
officer (231(4)) and murder in the case of a contract killing (231(3)).

{{< hint danger >}}
A **distinct causation test** applies to provisions that raise second
degree murder to first degree which contain the phrase "caused by that
person" found in sections 231(5), 231(6), 231(6.01), (6.1), and (6.2): *i.e.*,
where death is intentionally caused during a sexual assault, kidnapping,
hostage taking, criminal harassment, terrorism, etc.

For these provisions, the accused's actions must be a "**substantial and
integral cause**" (*Harbottle*).
{{< /hint >}}

### First degree murder:

First degree murder is not a distinct offence but a classification of a
form of murder for sentencing purposes. (The Crown must first establish
the elements for murder.)

**Murder is first degree murder when it is planned and deliberate.**
(231(2))

> -planned means a "calculated scheme or design" though either can be
> simple. A murder may be "planned" even if it is immediately carried
> out. (*Widdifield*)
>
> -deliberate means "slow in deciding," "considered," or "not
> impulsive." (*More*)
>
> -murder can be "planned and deliberate" even where it entails a plan
> to inflict bodily harm with knowledge that it is likely to cause
> death. (*Nygaard*)

A murder will be first degree under section 231(5) if death is caused
"while committing" a series of offences including sexual assault and
unlawful confinement. The victim of the murder need not be the victim of
the listed offence. (*Russell*)

Where an accused has the *mens rea* for murder, and the murder is
planned and deliberate but the accused by accident kills another person,
that act is murder in the first degree. (*Droste*)

Where murder is raised from second to first degree under section 231(4)
(murder of a peace officer in execution of duty, among other
circumstances), the Crown must prove subjective knowledge of the facts
in the provision (*i.e.*, the victim was an officer in the execution of
his duty, etc.). (*Collins*)

All murder that is not first degree murder is second degree. (Section
231(7))

[^1]: An unlawful act causing death might also be murder or infanticide,
    if the elements for those offences are made out (the elements are
    set out in sections 229 and 233, respectively).

[^2]: The Supreme Court's holdings in *Creighton* and *DeSousa* suggest
    that if the unlawful act here is a strict liability offence, the
    court should read in the standard of penal negligence: *i.e.*, the
    Crown must prove BARD that the unlawful act constituted a marked
    departure from the conduct of the reasonable person.
