# Summary of Provocation

## General points:

Section 232(1) states: "Culpable homicide that otherwise would be murder
may be reduced to manslaughter if the person who committed it did so in
the heat of passion caused by sudden provocation."

Section 232(2) defines provocation as follows: "**Conduct of the victim
that would constitute an indictable offence under this Act that is
punishable by five or more years of imprisonment** and that is of such a
nature as to be sufficient to deprive an ordinary person of the power of
self-control is provocation for the purposes of this section, if the
accused acted on it on the sudden and before there was time for their
passion to cool."

Provocation does not apply to an act the accused has provoked or an act
that arises from the victim's exercise of a legal right---*i.e.*, an
officer carrying out a lawful arrest. (232(3))

Prior to 2015, the portion of section 232(2) underlined above was not
part of the provision. Instead of the portion underlined above, the
provision defined provocation as a 'wrongful act or insult' by the
victim that would cause an ordinary person to lose the power of
self-control, with the accused acting on the sudden and before there was
time for their passions to cool.

In 2019, the BC Supreme Court, in *R v Simard* held that the words added
to 232(2) in the 2015 amendments violate section 7 of the *Charter* (and
the SCC dismissed a direct application for leave to appeal this
decision). What follows is a summary of the law remaining valid in BC.

{{< hint info >}}
**Elements of the defence of provocation** set out in *R v. Hill*:

(1) Would an ordinary person be deprived of self-control by the victim's
    act? (objective)

(2) Did A in fact act lose control as a result of these provocative
    acts? (subjective)

(3) Was A's response sudden and before there was time for passions to
    cool? (subjective)
{{< /hint >}}

(Courts in Quebec and Ontario have since followed *Simard*, but the Ontario Court of Appeal in *R v Brar* (2024) has taken a different view, holding that the 2015 amends to section 232(2) do not violate section 7 of the *Charter*.)

**Earlier holdings on section 232 from the SCC that are still valid:**

The question at stage 1 is not whether the ordinary person would have
done *what* the accused did but whether the act would have provoked them
to lose the power of self-control. (*Hill*)

Before the defence may be put to the jury, the accused must raise an air
of reality for **each** element of the defence (*i.e.*, there must be
*some* evidence on which a jury, acting reasonably, ***might*** conclude
that the accused's response was "sudden and before her passions had
cooled" \[or whatever the element requires\]).

Once an air of reality has been established, the burden shifts to the
Crown to prove BARD that **one** or more elements of the defence do
**not** apply. (*e.g.,* there was no reasonable possibility that the
accused acted on the sudden...)

The Supreme Court in *Tran* held: "For the defence to succeed, the jury
must have a reasonable doubt about whether each of the elements of
provocation was present." Put otherwise, the jury must conclude that
there is a reasonable possibility that *each* element applies.

Provocation is not a defence to attempted murder; but evidence of
provocation may be invoked here to raise a doubt about whether the
accused had the specific intent to kill. (*Campbell*)

## Specific points:

In the **first** part of the *Hill* test, the 'ordinary person' is:

-not exceptionally excitable, pugnacious or drunk;

> -the same age, race, and sex as the accused, if these are relevant to
> a 'particular feature of the provocation in question'; and

-subjected to the same circumstances as the accused. (*Hill*)

The ordinary person also shares the background history between the
accused and the victim, and this can be considered when assessing
whether the act would suffice to cause the ordinary person to lose
self-control. (*Thibert*)

The ordinary person does not share characteristics with the accused that
conflict with *Charter* values: *e.g.*, the accused's homophobia or
belief in honour killing. (*Tran*)

In the **second** part of *Hill* test, when assessing whether the
accused lost self-control, the court can consider all aspects particular
to the accused, including intoxication, mental state or psychological
temperament, and the history of the relationship with the victim.
(*Hill*, *Thibert*)

The provocative act must be sudden; it cannot amount to knowledge one
already possessed. (*Tran*)

Acting out of anger alone will not suffice to constitute provocation;
all of the elements of the defence must be made out. (*Parent*)
