# Summary of Mental Disorder

## Overview

Distinguish the following procedural facets:

1.  Fitness to stand trial

2.  Mental disorder defence (at trial)

3.  Review Board dispositions

## 1\. Fitness to stand trial:

The accused, the Crown, or the court on its own motion may raise the
issue of the accused's **fitness** to stand trial at any time during a
prosecution *before* the verdict is rendered. (By contrast, the Crown is
restricted as to when it may raise the **defence** of mental disorder.
See below.)

The accused is *presumed* to be fit to stand trial, unless the court is
satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the accused is not fit. The
persuasive burden rests on the party raising the issue of fitness.
(section 672.22)

{{< hint info >}}
**Test for fitness**

Section 2 of the *Criminal Code* states that a person is "unfit to stand trial" where, *"on account of* mental
disorder, \[she is unable\] to conduct a defence at any stage of the
proceedings before a verdict is rendered or to instruct counsel to do
so, and, in particular, unable on account of mental disorder to:

a\. understand the nature or object of the proceedings,

b\. understand the possible consequences of the proceedings, or

c\. communicate with counsel".

{{< /hint >}}

To be found fit under section 2, the accused need only possess a
"limited cognitive capacity to understand the process and to communicate
with counsel." He need not be "capable of making rational decisions
beneficial to him." (*Whittle*)

A person found unfit can be tried at a later time, if he is later found
to be fit. If the Crown seeks to preserve the status of a prosecution
while waiting for the accused to become fit, the Crown must establish a
*prima facie* case for the offence every two years. (section 672.33)

A person found unfit to stand trial is remanded to the Review Board for
a disposition hearing under section 672.54 (the court can also carry out
the disposition hearing but usually remits the matter to the Board). In that hearing, an accused who has been found unfit to
stand trial may be released on conditions or be ordered to remain in
hospital, but may not be discharged absolutely. (s. 672.54)

If the court finds that a person is not likely to *ever* become fit to
stand trial *and* does not pose a significant threat to public safety,
the court may grant a stay of prosecution. (*Demers*; s. 672.851).[^1]

## 2\. Mental disorder defence:

The mental disorder defence is set out in section 16 of the *Code*, and
the phrase "mental disorder" is a defined term in section 2. The defence
serves to exempt a person from criminal liability based on an incapacity
for criminal intent or excuse what would otherwise be a criminal
offence. (*Chaulk*)

{{< hint info >}}
**The mental disorder defence**

Section 16 states that a person is not to be found criminally
responsible for an act or omission committed "while suffering from a
mental disorder that rendered the person incapable of appreciating the
nature and quality of the act or omission or of knowing that it was
wrong."
{{< /hint >}}

> (A key element of the test is the causal connection: the failure to
> appreciate the nature or quality of the act, or to know it was wrong,
> must be *an effect of* the mental disorder.)

Section 2 defines "mental disorder" as a "disease of the mind," thus
incorporating the common law definitions of this phrase (see below).

Either the accused or the Crown may invoke the defence of mental
disorder. Before it may be put to the jury, the party seeking to rely on
it must establish an air of reality for each element of the defence.

Once an air of reality has been established, the burden remains with the
party seeking to rely on the defence to persuade the trier of fact that
each element of the defence applies on a balance of probabilities.

> This violates the presumption of innocence in s. 11(d), because it
> allows for a conviction where there is a reasonable doubt about *mens
> rea* or the voluntariness of the *actus reus*. The violation has been
> held to be a reasonable limit on the right, under s. 1, because, among
> other reasons, the accused is in the best position to present evidence
> as to their mental state. (*Chaulk*)

While the accused may raise the mental disorder defence at any point
during the trial, the Crown may raise the defence in only two instances:
(a) once it has established a *prima facie* case for the elements of the
offence (*mens rea* and *actus reus*); or (b) when, in the course of the
trial, the accused has raised the issue of his or her capacity for
criminal intent (*e.g.*, voluntariness, automatism, etc.) (*Swain*).

If the court (or jury) finds that the test in section 16 has been met on
a balance of probabilities, the accused is found "not criminally
responsible due to mental disorder" (NCRMD) and remanded to the Review
Board for a disposition hearing under section 672.54 within 45 days.

If the judge or jury finds that the elements of the mental disorder
defence have **not** been established on a balance of probabilities, the
facts supporting the defence may still be considered in assessing
whether the *mens rea* of the offence has been established beyond a
reasonable doubt.

> For example, facts relating to the accused's mental state at the time
> of the offence might fall short of the elements in section 16, but
> still raise a reasonable doubt about whether a murder was "planned and
> deliberate," or whether the accused had the necessary intent for
> murder ("means to cause death" or "means to cause bodily that he knows
> is likely cause death"). (*Swain*)

### 'Disease of the mind'

Whether a person suffers from a "disease of the mind" is a legal and not
a medical issue. Medical evidence assists in deciding the issue but is
not determinative. (*Simpson*)

"Disease of the mind" includes "any illness, disorder or abnormal
condition that impairs the human mind and its functioning, \[but
excludes\] self-induced states caused by alcohol or drugs, as well as
transitory mental states such as hysteria or concussion." (Where a
person suffers an abnormal mental condition or impairment due to the
voluntary consumption of intoxicants, the proper defence is
intoxication.) (*Cooper*)

### 'Appreciating the nature and quality of the act'

This refers specifically to an ability to perceive the *physical*
consequences, impact, or results of the act (*e.g.*, that the act of
choking would cause death). (*Cooper*)

It does not require that the act be "accompanied by appropriate feeling
\[such as guilt or remorse\] about the effect of the act on other
people." (*Cooper*)

### 'Knowing that the act was wrong'

Wrong here means morally wrong or "contrary to the ordinary moral
standards of reasonable men and women." (*Chaulk*)

It does not require that the accused know only that something was
"legally wrong." (*Chaulk*)

To fail to know that "the act was wrong," the accused must lack an
awareness that the act was morally wrong by society's standards.
(*Chaulk*)

## 3\. Review Board:

Once a person has been found unfit to stand trial or NCRMD, the Review
Board must make the disposition that is "necessary and appropriate in
the circumstances", taking into account public safety and the needs of
the accused -- but with "the safety of the public...the paramount
consideration". (Section 672.54)

{{< hint info >}}
**Dispositions**

The three dispositions under section 672.54 available to an accused
person found NCRMD are:

i.  an absolute discharge,

ii. a conditional discharge, or

iii. detention in custody in the hospital.

{{< /hint >}}

The SCC in *Winko* held that in a hearing under section 672.54, "If
the court or Review Board concludes that the NCR accused is **not** a
significant threat to the safety of the public, it must order an
absolute discharge."

A person unfit to stand trial may only be conditionally discharged or
detained in hospital. (This would continue until a person is found not
likely to ever become fit and the charge is stayed \[section 672.54\] --
or if the Crown decides to stay the charge, or if the Crown fails to
present a *prima face* case at intervals of up to 2 years and the charge
is stayed by the court \[s. 672.33\].)

The Review Board scheme allows for indefinite detention in hospital but
was held in *Winko* to be consistent with section 7 and 11(d) of the
*Charter*, given the requirement in section 672.54 for the least onerous
disposition and periodic reviews of detentions or conditional discharges
at yearly intervals (or sooner). It is unclear whether this is still the
case, given that amended section now requires the order "necessary and
appropriate in the circumstances", with "the safety of the public...the
paramount consideration".

[^1]: The court may also grant a stay where a person does pose a
    significant threat, under a further test in section 672.851(8).
