# Summary of Necessity

## General Points

The defence of necessity *excuses* criminal conduct (resulting in an
acquittal) where an accused facing "clear and imminent peril" acts to
avoid a greater harm -- rendering their conduct "morally involuntary."
 

The Court in *Perka* recognized the defence at common law; it applies to all criminal offences, possibly including murder. (*Latimer*)

Before the defence may be put to a jury, the accused must raise an air
of reality with respect to each element of the defence; the burden then
shifts to the Crown to prove BARD that one or more elements do **not**
apply. (*Perka*)

{{< hint info >}}
The elements of the defence as set out in *Perka*:

i.  the accused was in a situation of "clear and imminent peril";

ii. there was no "reasonable **legal alternative** to disobeying the
    law";

iii. the harm threatened was proportionate to the harm inflicted.
{{< /hint >}}

Involvement in criminal or negligent activity is not a bar to the
defence. But an accused cannot make recourse to the defence of necessity
where she placed herself in a situation where the peril was reasonably
foreseeable. (*Perka*)

## Specifics:

The SCC in *Latimer* held that the **first two** elements of the *Perka*
test are assessed on a modified objective basis, or from the perspective
of the reasonable person who shares the situation and characteristics of
the accused.

The third element of the test is assessed on a purely objective basis.
The harm need not "clearly outweigh" the harm imposed but must be of
"comparable gravity." (*Latimer*)

Necessity **may** be a defence to murder if the peril faced was
"seriously comparable in gravity to death" and other elements of the
defence were established. (*obiter in Latimer*)
